Nitric oxide has several biological roles and nitric oxide synthase (NOS) is expressed in the nervous system, and co-localizes with NADPH-diaphorase. The superficial layers of the superior colliculus (SC), which receive retinal and cortical inputs, present NADPH-d staining in a sub-population of neurons that include all cell types. We have previously shown, by NADPH-diaphorase, that eye enucleation alters the intracellular distribution of NOS. Here, we studied the effect of cortical ablation on NOS expression by neurons in collicular superficial layers. Our results show that cortical ablation alters the proportion of different NOS-positive cell types, but not the intracellular distribution of the enzyme.

The targeting of proteins to cell organelles and membranes, or of proteins destined to secretion, is coordinated by signal sequences located at the 5´-end of their respective genes. A signal sequence trap system was envisaged in which a truncated version of the yeast acid phosphatase pho5 gene lacking the start codon and signal sequence could serve as a reporter gene. A fraction enriched in 5´-end fragments obtained by PCR from a potato guard-cell cDNA library was cloned in frame to the acid phosphatase gene and the acid phosphatase activity was assayed directly in yeast colonies grown on selective medium. Putative signal sequences targeting the acid phosphatase to the membrane or to the outside of the cell were used to screen the cDNA bank in order to recover the original full-size sequence which gave rise to the signal sequence. Two unknown sequences displaying marked tissue-specific expression were retrieved, one of them (YE139) with a higher expression level in green buds and stem cells, and the other one (YE290) with a higher expression level in androceum, gyneceum, and roots. The limitations of the system are further analyzed using other sequences as control.

The surface charge of trypanosomatids was evaluated by means of the binding of cationic particles, as visualized by electron microscopy and by direct measurements of the electrophoretic mobility of cells. The results obtained indicate that most of the trypanosomatids exhibit a negatively charged surface whose value is species specific and varies according to the developmental stages. Sialic acids associated with glycoproteins, glycolipids and phosphate groups are the major components responsible for the net negative surface charge of the trypanosomatids.